[Music]
[Applause]
the substance of things unseen city's
past and future in Oxford perhaps we can
use Lewis Carroll and look in the
looking-glass that is New York City to
try and see our true selves or perhaps
pass through to another world or in the
words of f scott Fitzgerald as the moon
rose higher the in essential houses
begin to melt away until gradually I
became aware of the old island here that
once flowered for Dutch sailors eyes a
fresh green breast of the new world my
colleagues and I have been working for
10 years to rediscover this lost world
in a project we called the mana hot tub
project we're trying to discover what
Henry Hudson would have seen on the
afternoon of September 12 1609 when he
sailed into New York Harbor and I'd like
to tell you the story in three acts and
if I have time still an epilogue so act
one a map found so I didn't grow up in
New York I grew up out west in Sierra
Nevada mountains like you see here and
then Red Rock canyons and from these
early experiences as a child I learned
to love landscapes and so when it became
time for me to do my graduate studies I
studied this emerging field of landscape
ecology landscape ecology concerns
itself with how the stream and the
meadow and the forest and the cliffs
make habitats for plants and animals
this experience and this training led me
to get a wonderful job with the Wildlife
Conservation Society which worked to
save wildlife in wild places all over
the world and over the last decade I've
traveled to over 40 countries to see
Jaguars and bears and elephants and
tigers and rhinos but every time I would
return from my trips I'd returned back
to New York City and on my weekends I
would go up just like all the other
tourists on top of the Empire State
Building and I'd look down on this
landscape on these ecosystems and I'd
wonder how does this landscape work to
make habitat for plants and animals how
does it work to make habitat for animals
like me I go to Times Square and I'd
look at the amazing ladies on the wall
and wonder why nobody's looking at the
historical figures just behind them I go
to Central Park can see the rolling
topography
Central Park come up against the abrupt
and sheer topography of midtown
Manhattan I started reading about the
history in the geography of New York
City
I read that New York City was the first
mega city a city of ten million people
or more in 1950 I started seeing
paintings like this for those of you who
are from New York this is 125th Street
under the West Side Highway
it was once a beach and this painting
has John James Audubon the pain are
sitting on the rock and it's looking up
on the wooded Heights of Washington
Hyde's to Jeffrey's Hook where the
George Washington Bridge goes across
today or this painting from the 1740s
from Greenwich Village those are two
students at King's College later
Columbia University City on a hill
overlooking a valley and so I go down to
Greenwich Village and I would look for
this hill and I couldn't find it and I
couldn't find that palm tree what's that
palm tree doing there so it was in the
course of these investigations that I
ran into a map and it's this map you see
here it's held in a geographic
information system which allows me to
zoom in this map isn't from Hudson's
time but from the American Revolution
170 years later made by British military
cartographers during the occupation of
New York City and it's remarkable map
it's in the National Archives here in
Kew and it's ten feet long and three and
a half feet wide and if i zoom in to
lower Manhattan you can see the extent
of New York City as it was right at the
end of the American Revolution here's
Bowling Green and here's Broadway and
this is City Hall Park so the city is
basically extended to City Hall Park and
just beyond it you can see features that
have vanished things that have
disappeared this is the collec pond
which was the fresh water source for New
York City for its first 200 years and
for the Native Americans for thousands
of years before that you can see the
lispenard Meadows draining down through
here through what Tribeca now and the
beaches that come up from the battery
all the way to 42nd Street this map was
made for military reasons they're
mapping the roads the buildings these
fortifications that they built but
they're also mapping things of
ecological interest also military
interest the hills the marshes the
streams this is Richmond Hill and
Minetta water which used to run its way
through Greenwich Village where the the
swamp
the Gramercy Park right here or Murray
Hill and this is the Murray's house on
Murray Hill 200 years ago
here's Times Square the two streams that
came together to make a wetland in Times
Square as it was at the end of the
American Revolution so I saw this
remarkable map in a book and I thought
to myself you know if I could
geo-reference this map if I could place
this map in the grid of the city today I
could find these lost features of the
city in the block-by-block geography
that people know the geography of where
people go to work and where they go to
live and where they like to eat so after
some work we were able to georeference
it which allows us to put the modern
streets on the city and the buildings
and the open spaces so that we can zoom
in to where the collec pond is we can
digitize the collec pond and the streams
and see where they actually are in the
geography of the city today so this is
fun for finding where things are
relative to the old topography but I had
another idea about this map if we take
away the streets and if we take away the
buildings we take away the open spaces
that we could take this map if we pull
off the eighteenth-century features we
could drive it back in time we could
drive it back to a psychological
fundamentals to the hills to the streams
to the the basic hydrology and shoreline
to the beaches the basic aspects that
make the ecological landscape that if we
added Maps like the geology the bedrock
geology and the surface geology what the
glaciers leave if we make the soil map
with the 17 soil classes they're defined
by the National Conservation Service if
we make a digital elevation model of the
topography that tells us how high the
hills were then we can calculate the
slopes we can calculate the aspect we
can calculate the winter wind exposure
so which way to the winter wind blow
across the landscape the wide areas on
this map of the place is protected from
the winter winds we compiled all the
information about what
Native Americans were the lone apey and
we built a probability map of where they
might have been so the red areas on this
map indicate the places that are best
for human suitability on Manhattan
places it a close to water places that
are near the harbour to fish places
protected from the winter winds we know
that there was a Lynott a settlement
down here by the collect pond and we
knew that they planted a kind of
horticultural that they grew these
beautiful gardens of corn beans and
squash the three sisters garden so we
built a model that explains where those
fields might have been and the old
fields the successional fields that go
and we might think of these as abandoned
but in fact they're grassland habitat
for grassland birds and in plants and
then they become successional shrub
lands and that these then mix in to a
map of all the ecological communities
and it turns out that Manhattan had 55
different ecosystem types you can think
of these as neighborhoods as distinctive
as Tribeca and the Upper East Side and
in wood that these are the forests and
the wetland and the marine communities
the beaches and 55 is a lot on a per
area basis Manhattan had more ecological
communities per acre than Yosemite does
in Yellowstone and Amboseli it was
really an extraordinary landscape that
was capable of supporting an
extraordinary biodiversity so act to a
home reconstructed so we studied the
fish in the frogs and the birds and the
bees the 85 different kinds of fish that
were on Manhattan the heath hens the
species that aren't there anymore
the Beavers on all the streams the black
bears and the Native Americans to study
how they used and thought about their
landscape we wanted to try and map these
and to do that what we did was we map
their habitat needs so where do they get
their food where do they get their water
where do they get their shelter where do
they get their reproductive resources to
an ecologist the intersection of these
is habitat but to most people the
intersection of these is their home so
we would read and field guides the
standard field guide that maybe you have
on your shelves you know what beavers
need as a slowly man during the stream
with aspen trees and alders and willows
and you
the water that's the best thing for a
beaver so we just started making a list
here's the beaver and here's the stream
and the Aspen and the alder and the
willow as if these were the maps that we
would need to protect where you would
find the beaver where the bog turtle
needing wet meadows and insects and
sunny places or the Bobcat needing
Ravitz and beavers and den sites and
rapidly we started to realize that
beavers can be something that a bobcat
needs but a beaver also needs things and
that having it on either side means we
can link it together that we can create
the network of the habitat relationships
for these species more of what we
realize that you can start out as being
a beaver specialist but you can look up
what an aspen needs an aspen needs fire
and dry soils that you can look at what
a what meadow needs and it needs beavers
to create the wetlands and maybe some
other things that you can also talk
about sunny places so what does a sunny
place need not habitat per se but what
are the conditions that make it possible
or fire or dry soils and that you can
put these on a grid that's a thousand
columns long across the top and a
thousand rows down the other way and
then we can visualize this data like a
network like a social network and this
is the network of all the habitat
relationships of all the plants and
animals on Manhattan and everything they
needed going back to the geology going
back to time and space at the very core
of the web we call this the mirror web
and if you zoom in on it it looks like
this each point is a different species
or a different stream or different soil
type and those little grey lines are the
connections that connect them together
the other connections that actually make
nature resilient and the structure of
this is what makes nature work seen with
all its parts we call these mirror webs
after the Scottish American naturalist
John Muir who said when we try and pick
out anything by itself we find that it's
bound fast by a thousand visible chords
cannot be broken to everything in the
universe so then we took the mirror webs
and we took them back to the maps so if
we wanted to go between 85th and 86th
and Lex and third and maybe there's a
stream in that block then these would be
the kind of trees that might have been
there and the flowers and the lichens
and the mosses the butterflies
the fish in the stream the birds in the
trees maybe a timber rattlesnake live
there and perhaps a black bear walked by
and maybe Native Americans were there
and then we took this data you can see
this for yourself on our website you can
zoom into any block on Manhattan and see
what might have been there four hundred
years ago and we used it to try and
reveal a landscape here in act 3 we use
the tools they use in Hollywood to make
these fantastic landscapes that we all
see in the movies and we tried to use it
to visualize 3rd Avenue so we would take
the landscape and we would build up the
topography we had to lay on top of that
the soils and the waters and illuminate
the landscape we would lay on top of
that the map of the ecological
communities and feed into that the map
of the species so that we naturally take
a photograph flying above Times Square
looking toward the Hudson River waiting
for Hudson to come using this technology
we can make these fantastic
geo-reference views we can basically
take a picture out of any window on
Manhattan and see what that landscape
looked like four hundred years ago this
is the view from the East River looking
up Murray Hill and where the United
Nations is today this is the view
looking down the Hudson River with
Manhattan on the left and New Jersey out
on the right looking out toward the
Atlantic Ocean this is the view over
Times Square with a beaver pond they're
looking out toward the east so we can
see the collect pond and lispenard
marshes back behind we can see the
fields that the Native Americans made
and we can see this in the geography of
the city today so when you're watching
law and order and the lawyers walk up
the steps they could have walked back
down those steps in your courthouse
right into the collect on four hundred
years ago so these these images are the
work of mine my friend and colleague
mark Boyer who's here in the audience
today and I just like if you would give
him a hand to call out for his fine work
with such power and bringing science and
visualization together we can create
images like this perhaps looking on
either side of the looking glass and
even though I've only had a brief time
to speak I hope you appreciate that
mannahatta was a very special place the
the place that you see here on the left
side was interconnected it was based on
his diversity and had this resilience
that is what we need in our modern world
but I wouldn't have you think that I I
don't like the place on the right which
I quite do I've come to love the city
and its kind of diversity and it's
resilient and its dependence on inter in
on density and how we're connected
together in fact that I see them as
reflections of each other much as much
as Lewis Carroll did through the
looking-glass we can we can compare
these two and hold them in our minds at
the same time but they really are the
same place that there's no way that
cities can escape from nature and I
think this is what what we're learning
about building cities of the future so
if you allow me a brief epilogue not
about the past but about four hundred
years from now what we're realizing is
that cities are habitat for people and
needs to supply what people need a sense
of home food water shelter reproductive
resources and a sense of meaning this is
the particular additional habitat
requirement of humanity and so many of
the talks here at Ted are about meaning
about bringing meaning to our lives and
all kinds of different ways through
technology through art through science
so much so that I think we've we focused
so much on that sides of our lives then
we haven't given enough tension to the
food and the water and the shelter and
what we need to raise the kids so how
can we a vision the city of the future
well what if we go to Madison Square
Park and we imagine it without all the
cars and bicycles instead and large
forests and streams instead of sewers
and storm drains what if we imagined the
Upper East Side with green roofs and
streams wending through the city and
windmills supplying the power we need or
if we imagine the New York City
metropolitan area currently home to 12
million people but 12 million people in
the future perhaps living at the density
of Manhattan and only 36% of the area
with the areas in between covered by
farmland covered by wetlands covered by
the marshes we need this is the kind of
future I think we need is a future that
that has the same diversity and
abundance and and dynamism of Manhattan
but that learned from the sustainability
of the past of ecology the original
ecology of nature with all its parts
thank you very much
[Applause]
[Music]